=head1 NAME

nbdublk - connect network block device to a local device

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbdublk [-C N|--connections N] [-r] [-v|--verbose] /dev/ublkb<N> URI

 nbdublk [-C N|--connections N] [-r] [-v|--verbose] <N> URI

 nbdublk [-C N|--connections N] [-r] [-v|--verbose] - URI

=for paragraph

 nbdublk /dev/ublkb<N> [ CMD [ARGS ...] ]

=for paragraph

 nbdublk /dev/ublkb<N> --command CMD [ARGS ...]

=for paragraph

 nbdublk /dev/ublkb<N> --fd N

=for paragraph

 nbdublk /dev/ublkb<N> --tcp HOST PORT

=for paragraph

 nbdublk /dev/ublkb<N> --unix SOCKET

=for paragraph

 nbdublk /dev/ublkb<N> --vsock CID PORT

To list devices:

 ublk list

To unmount:

 ublk del -n <N>

Other commands:

 nbdublk --help

=for paragraph

 nbdublk -V|--version

=for paragraph

 modprobe ublk_drv

=head1 DESCRIPTION

nbdublk is used to create a Linux device F</dev/ublkbI<E<lt>NE<gt>>>
from a network block device server.  Reads and writes to the virtual
device are turned into reads and writes to the NBD server.

The first parameter is the Linux device name of the form
F</dev/ublkbI<E<lt>NE<gt>>> (for some number I<E<lt>NE<gt>>), for
example F</dev/ublkb0>, F</dev/ublkb1>, &c.  You can just use the
number on its own, or use C<-> to get ublk to allocate an unused
device.

The second and following parameters refer to the NBD server, which can
be local or remote.  The server can be specified as an NBD URI (like
C<nbd://localhost>), or as an NBD server running as a subprocess of
nbdublk (using S<C<[ ... ]>>), or in various other ways (see
L</MODES>).

Use L<ublk(8)> to list and delete devices.

=head2 Requires Linux and root

This program requires Linux E<ge> 6.0 and the C<ublk_drv.ko> kernel
module.  You may need to load the kernel module and you usually have
to run nbdublk as root.

=head1 EXAMPLE

Create an NBD ublk device connected to a remote NBD server:

 # nbdublk /dev/ublkb0 nbd://server

List the device:

 # ublk list
 dev id 0: nr_hw_queues 4 queue_depth 64 block size 1 dev_capacity 0
	 max rq size 67108864 daemon pid 32382 flags 0x0 state LIVE

You can then use C</dev/ublkb0> as a regular device.  To disconnect
the device use:

 # ublk del -n 0

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<--help>

Display brief command line help and exit.

=item B<-C> N

=item B<--connections> N

If multi-conn is used, use N connections to the server.  The default
is 4.

Multi-conn is enabled by default when possible.  Modes which run a
subprocess, such as I<--command> are not able to use multi-conn.  Mode
I<--fd> also cannot use multi-conn.  Also the server must advertise
multi-conn (use L<nbdinfo(1)> to query what the server supports).

=item B<-C 1>

=item B<--connections 1>

Disable multi-conn.  Only use a single connection to the NBD server.
See L</THREAD MODEL> below.

=item B<-r>

=item B<--readonly>

Access the network block device read-only.  The virtual file will have
read-only permissions, and any writes will return errors.

If the remote NBD server is read-only then this flag is added
automatically.  (Check C<is_read_only:> field in the output of
L<nbdinfo(1)>).

=item B<-v>

=item B<--verbose>

Enable verbose messages to stderr.  This enables libnbd debugging and
other messages.

=item B<-V>

=item B<--version>

Display the package name and version and exit.

=back

=head1 MODES

Modes are used to select the NBD server.  Possible modes are:

=over 4

=item nbdublk DEVICE URI

This mode uses an NBD URI (see L<nbd_connect_uri(3)> and
L<https://github.com/NetworkBlockDevice/nbd/blob/master/doc/uri.md>).
For example this specifies a TLS-encrypted connection to
C<example.com> port C<10809>, with export name C<disk>:

 nbdublk /dev/ublkb0 nbds://example.com/disk

=item nbdublk DEVICE B<[> CMD [ARGS ...] B<]>

Run an NBD server as a subprocess.  In this mode an NBD server can be
run directly from the command line with nbdublk communicating with the
server over a socket.  This requires that the NBD server supports
systemd socket activation.  See L</EXAMPLES> above and
L<nbd_connect_systemd_socket_activation(3)>.

=item nbdublk DEVICE B<--command> CMD [ARGS ...]

Select command mode.  In this mode an NBD server can be run directly
from the command line with nbdublk communicating with the server over
the server’s stdin/stdout.  Normally you would use this with
C<nbdkit -s>.  See L<nbd_connect_command(3)>.

=item nbdublk DEVICE B<--fd> N

Select file descriptor mode.  In this mode a connected socket is
passed to nbdublk.  nbdublk connects to the socket on the numbered
file descriptor.  See also L<nbd_connect_socket(3)>.

=item nbdublk DEVICE B<--tcp> HOST PORT

Select TCP mode.  Connect to an NBD server on a host and port over an
unencrypted TCP socket.  See also L<nbd_connect_tcp(3)>.

=item nbdublk DEVICE B<--unix> SOCKET

Select Unix mode.  Connect to an NBD server on a Unix domain socket.
See also L<nbd_connect_unix(3)>.

=item nbdublk DEVICE B<--vsock> CID PORT

Select vsock mode.  Connect to an NBD server on a C<AF_VSOCK> socket.
See also L<nbd_connect_vsock(3)>.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<libnbd(3)>,
L<nbdcopy(1)>,
L<nbddump(1)>,
L<nbdfuse(1)>,
L<nbdinfo(1)>,
L<nbdsh(1)>,
L<ublk(8)>,
L<nbd_connect_uri(3)>,
L<nbd_connect_command(3)>,
L<nbd_connect_socket(3)>,
L<nbd_connect_systemd_socket_activation(3)>,
L<nbd_connect_tcp(3)>,
L<nbd_connect_unix(3)>,
L<nbd_connect_vsock(3)>,
L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<nbdkit-loop(1)>,
L<qemu-nbd(8)>,
L<nbd-client(8)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

Ming Lei

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright Red Hat
