=head1 NAME

nbdsh - network block device (NBD) shell

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 $ nbdsh
 
 Welcome to nbdsh, the shell for interacting with
 Network Block Device (NBD) servers.
 
 The ‘nbd’ module has already been imported and there
 is an open NBD handle called ‘h’.
 
 nbd> h.connect_command (["nbdkit", "-s", "memory", "1G"])
 nbd> h.get_size ()
 1073741824
 nbd> buf = b"hello, world"
 nbd> h.pwrite (buf, 0, 0)
 nbd> exit()

=head1 DESCRIPTION

nbdsh is a Python-based client shell for accessing Network Block
Device (NBD) servers.

For documentation about the libnbd API please open the shell and type:

 help (nbd)

=head1 EXAMPLES

=head2 Print the size of an NBD export

The I<-u> option connects to an NBD URI.  The I<-c> option lets
you execute single Python statements from the command line.  Combining
these two options lets you print the size in bytes of an NBD export:

 $ nbdsh -u nbd://localhost -c 'print (h.get_size ())'
 1073741824

=head2 Hexdump the boot sector of an NBD export

Using I<-c -> you can feed a whole Python program to the standard
input of nbdsh:

__EXAMPLES_HEXDUMP__

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<-h>

=item B<--help>

Display brief command line help and exit.

=item B<--base-allocation>

Request the use of the "base:allocation" meta context, which is the
most common context used with L<nbd_block_status(3)>.  This is
equivalent to calling S<C<h.set_meta_context
(nbd.CONTEXT_BASE_ALLOCATION)>> in the shell prior to connecting.

=item B<-c> 'COMMAND ...'

=item B<--command> 'COMMAND ...'

Instead of starting an interactive shell, run a command.  This option
can be specified multiple times in order to run multiple commands.

=item B<-c ->

=item B<--command ->

Read standard input and execute it as a command.

=item B<-u> URI

=item B<-uri> URI

=item B<--connect> URI

Connect to the given L<NBD URI|https://github.com/NetworkBlockDevice/nbd/blob/master/doc/uri.md>.
This is equivalent to the S<C<h.connect_uri (URI)>> command in the shell.

=item B<-V>

=item B<--version>

Display the package name and version and exit.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<libnbd(3)>,
L<libnbd-security(3)>,
L<nbdfuse(1)>,
L<qemu-img(1)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2019 Red Hat Inc.
