=head1 NAME

nbddump - hexdump the content of a disk over NBD

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 nbddump NBD

C<NBD> is an NBD URI or subprocess:

 NBD := nbd://... | nbd+unix:// (or other URI formats)
      | [ CMD ARGS ... ]

=for paragraph

 nbddump --help

=for paragraph

 nbddump --version

=head1 DESCRIPTION

nbddump prints the content of a disk from an NBD server using the
usual hexdump format:

 $ nbddump nbd://localhost
 0000: 01 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 │················│
 0010: 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 │················│
 ☆
 0100: 68 65 6c 6c 6f 2c 20 77 6f 72 6c 64 21 00 00 00 │hello, world!···│
 0110: 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 │················│
 ☆
 1000: 00 00 00 21                                     │···!            │

=head2 Output format

The first field (before the C<:>) is the offset within the file, in
hexadecimal.

The second field shows the hex codes of bytes read from the file.

The third field shows the ASCII equivalent characters (if printable).

A splat character (C<☆>) indicates lines of repeated output which have
been squashed.  (Note this is not just for lines of zero bytes, but
any case where the next line shown would be the same as the previous
line.)

=head2 Subprocess

nbddump can also run an NBD server as a subprocess.  This requires an
NBD server which understands systemd socket activation, such as
L<qemu-nbd(8)> or L<nbdkit(1)>.

For example, to dump out a qcow2 file as raw data:

 nbddump -- [ qemu-nbd -r -f qcow2 file.qcow2 ]

Note that S<C<[ ... ]>> are separate parameters, and must be
surrounded by spaces.  C<--> separates nbddump parameters from
subprocess parameters.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<--help>

Display brief command line help and exit.

=item B<--color>

=item B<--colour>

=item B<--no-color>

=item B<--no-colour>

Enable or disable ANSI colours in output.  By default we use colours
if the output seems to be a terminal, and disable them if not.

=item B<--length=>N

=item B<-n> N

Dump up to I<N> bytes and then stop.

=item B<-V>

=item B<--version>

Display the package name and version and exit.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<libnbd(3)>,
L<nbdcopy(1)>,
L<nbdfuse(1)>,
L<nbdinfo(1)>,
L<nbdsh(1)>,
L<hexdump(1)>,
L<file(1)>,
L<qemu-img(1)>,
L<nbdkit(1)>,
L<qemu-nbd(8)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2022 Red Hat Inc.
