=head1 NAME

libnbd-release-notes-1.10 - release notes for libnbd 1.10

=head1 DESCRIPTION

These are the release notes for libnbd stable release 1.10.
This describes the major changes since 1.8.

libnbd 1.10.0 was released on B<23 September 2021>.

=head2 Security

There were no security bugs found in libnbd during this release cycle.

If you find a security issue, please read F<SECURITY> in the source
(online here:
L<https://gitlab.com/nbdkit/libnbd/blob/master/SECURITY>).  To
find out about previous security issues in libnbd, see
L<libnbd-security(3)>.

=head2 New APIs

No new APIs were added in 1.10.

=head2 Enhancements to existing APIs

L<nbd_get_uri(3)> no longer returns service names
(eg. C<"nbd://localhost:nbd">).  Instead it always returns raw port
numbers for portability.

L<nbd_connect_uri(3)> now supports C<tls-certificates=I<DIR>> query
parameter, making it much easier to connect to servers using TLS with
X.509 certificates.  Also error messages from this API have been
improved in the case of some common URI user errors.

Python C<nbd.aio_connect> implements support for C<AF_UNIX> sockets.

Fix invalid use of C<unsafe.Pointer> in Go bindings.

=head2 Tools

L<nbdcopy(1)> now uses a default request size of 256K (instead of 32M).
This default performs better in most cases.

L<nbdinfo(1)> has a new I<--map --totals> mode which displays a
summary of the map.  Also new I<--can> and I<--is> options let you
test export properties (eg. I<--is read-only>).

L<nbdinfo(1)> I<--map> option uses "data" instead of "allocated"
because of ambiguity about what "allocated" means (Eric Blake, Nir
Soffer).

L<nbdinfo(1)> shows the export size in both bytes and human units
(like C<"1K">).  The machine-parsable JSON output has not changed.

L<nbdfuse(1)> now supports efficient zeroing.  Note this requires
Linux kernel E<ge> 5.14.

L<nbdsh(1)> has new option I<-n> which avoids creating the implicit
handle C<h>.  Also new option I<-v> which enables debugging.  Also the
initial help banner is now context sensitive giving more relevant
information depending on how nbdsh was invoked.

=head2 Tests

CI tests were greatly enhanced and many platform-specific fixes were
made.  To view the latest CI tests and results see:
L<https://gitlab.com/nbdkit/libnbd/-/pipelines> (Martin Kletzander).

Tests now use the new C<GLIBC_TUNABLES> feature, replacing
C<MALLOC_CHECK_> on glibc E<ge> 2.34 (thanks Eric Blake,
Siddhesh Poyarekar).

=head2 Other improvements and bug fixes

The L<nbdcopy(1)> progress bar should be displayed more accurately in
multithreaded mode.

=head2 Documentation

L<nbd_connect(3)> and L<nbd_aio_connect(3)> documentation has been
revised and improved.

More consistent option styling is used throughout the documentation.

F<podwrapper.pl> has been unified (almost) with the copy in nbdkit.

=head2 Build

F<configure.ac> now uses spaces consistently, and has been modernized
to support the latest autotools (Eric Blake).

We now warn about large stack frames, and a few places which used
large stack frames have been fixed.

Continue fuzzing using AFL++.  Updated the fuzzing documentation.

Fix building from git with I<--disable-ocaml>.  As long as only
C<ocamlc> is installed, the generator should still be built and run
(Martin Kletzander).

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<libnbd(3)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

=begin comment

git shortlog -s v1.8.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item Anson Lo

=item Eric Blake

=item Martin Kletzander

=item Richard W.M. Jones

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright Red Hat
